Rosetta Implementation Notes
============================

Contents
--------

- [Intro](#intro)
- [Overview](#overview)
  - [Backend/Server](#backend/server)
  - [Frontend/Client](#frontend/client)

Intro
-----

This document provides an overview of the way the translation utility
works. The intended audience is developers who need to understand the
utility, and want to get some "big picture" information before jumping
into the code.

Overview
--------

Rosetta is PhET's tool for translating its HTML5 simulations. Its jobs
are as follows:

1. Gather data needed to translate sims.
2. Package data needed to translate sims.
3. Provide translators with a way to translate sims.

Rosetta accomplishes (1) and (2) using the backend/server. Rosetta
accomplishes (3) using the frontend/client.

### Backend/Server

The server uses Node, Express, and MongoDB. The server has five jobs. It
gathers and packages the data needed to translate sims, it makes the
data needed to translate sims available to the client, it serves
built/static files generated by the client, it stores translations, and
it requests builds for translations. Someone who is not familiar with
Rosetta might think Rosetta builds translations, but that's handled by
PhET's build server.

### Frontend/Client

The client uses React. The client has three jobs. It gets data needed to
translate sims from the server, it displays a user interface for
translating simulations using the data from the server, and it posts
saved or submitted translations to the server.

Vite is used to transpile and bundle the React code. The result of
transpiling and bundling the React code is a directory containing static
files. The server serves these static files.

Workflow
--------

This document describes my (Liam Mulhall) workflow in the hopes that
future maintainers understand why things are the way they are.

### IDE and Formatting

I use the JetBrains WebStorm IDE with the PhET code style
(`/phet-info/ide/idea/phet-idea-codestyle.xml`) to work on Rosetta.
Students can get any JetBrains IDE for free using their CU credentials.
PhET employees can get IntelliJ Idea and WebStorm, but I'm not sure
whether they can get the other JetBrains IDE's.

Adhering to PhET's code style is a must. The best way to do that is to
use a JetBrains IDE with the PhET code style mentioned above. I would
recommend using WebStorm instead of IntelliJ Idea because WebStorm is
meant for JavaScript development whereas IntelliJ Idea is meant for Java
development.

### Local Development

I've set the `start` script to lint and transpile/bundle React code
using Vite, and then start the Node/Express server.  When I make a
change to the client or the server, I simply run the `start` script
(`npm run start` or `npm start`) to see if my change works and play
around with Rosetta. When I'm done, I stop the script. Rinse and repeat.
